session1/Notes.md, before:

# Session 1: Introduction to Python

*Watch videos 1, 2, 3, 7 of this Python tutorial playlist if you missed this session: [link][bucky]*

The first thing that you’ll need to do is make sure you have Python installed on your
computer. You can find information on how to do that [here][install].

[bucky]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HBxCHonP6Ro&list=PL6gx4Cwl9DGAcbMi1sH6oAMk4JHw91mC_&index=1
[install]: https://github.com/oxcompsoc/learntocode/tree/master/session0

Throughout these documents note that text in a `monospaced font` is Python code.

## Information about CompSoc
The [Oxford University Computer Society][compsoc] was founded in 1978, making
it one of the oldest university computing societies in the country. 

This year, we will be holding Thursday Talks from both academics and sponsors / Workshops on Thursdays. Learn to code and socials on Saturdays (Weeks 1-7 7pm).

[Refer to our website for more and latest details of all events.][compsoc]

[compsoc]: https://ox.compsoc.net

## IDLE

Once you have Python installed you’ll be able to launch a piece of software
called IDLE. When you first launch it you will be greeted with a prompt where
you can type in statements or expressions in Python.
The IDLE is used for learning and experimenting purposes.

## Text Editor

The IDLE is not suitable for writing actual large programs. Instead, we would use the text editor method. We can create a new file by clicking **File > New File** at the top menu bar of the IDLE.
### Problems installing Python or using IDLE

If you can't get Python installed on your computer, don't worry! Instead,
please go to [this website][replit], which allows you to run Python programs
online. All our examples (until the final session) should run fine in either
the online version or IDLE.

[replit]: http://repl.it/languages/python3

## Our first program - Hello, world!

The programs that we are going to be writing in this course will all be
text-based, i.e. they can take text that you enter as input and produce text as
output. Although this might seem limited in the age of animated, interactive
apps they provide us with a strong foundation for programming.

One of the most basic programs we can write is one that just outputs some text.
In a new file in IDLE (or empty editor on `repl.it`) enter the following Python
program:

```python
print("Hello, world!")
```

In IDLE, then click **Run > Run Module** (or F5) or click the run button on
`repl.it`. IDLE will then run the program in the prompt window, and you should
see the output `"Hello, world!"`.


There are three elements to consider here:
* `print` is the name of a **function**. Functions are pieces of code that do
  something and/or calculate something. The `print` function outputs text
  (historically, the some of the earliest computers used physical printers as
  their primary form of output)
* `( )` (parentheses) are used to indicate that we are **calling** the function
  `print`, i.e. that we are telling Python to execute the `print` function
* `"Hello, world!"` is the **argument** to the function `print`, i.e. the text
  that we would like the code inside the `print` function to output. You'll
  notice that when the text is printed the quote marks are missing -
  this is because we have to indicate to Python that the argument is text,
  rather than other symbols. We call text that appears in programs like this
  **strings**

## Comments

Throughout the next examples, you will see some text written after a `#` symbol. These are called **comments**, and we will use them to explain and document our code. In Python, any text after a `#` on that line is not considered as part of the program. So we could have written our first program as:

```python
# this is the first comment
spam = 1  # and this is the second comment
          # ... and now a third!
text = "# This is not a comment because it's inside quotes."
print("Hello, world!") # Prints Hello, world!
```

## Variables

Python programs store data in **variables**. A variable is a bit like a box that has a name, and inside the box we can store values. The value stored could be changed based on user input, or as the program moves on. In Python, we have to put some value in our box when we create it. You can try:

```python
greeting1 = "Hello!" # The box named 'greeting1' now contains the string "Hello!"
my_favourite_number = 3 # The box named 'my_favourite_number' now contains the integer 3 
pi = 3.14 # The box named 'pi' now contains the floating point number 3.14
_underscore = "_" # The box named '_underscore' now contains the string "_"

print(greeting1) # Prints 'Hello!'
print(my_favourite_number) # Prints '3'
print(pi) # Prints '3.14'
print(_underscore) # Prints '_'
```

This created four variables, called `greeting1`, `my_favourite_number`, `pi`, and `_underscore` and then printed the values they store.

To assign a value to a variable we write `name = value` where `name` can be
replaced with any piece of text that Python allows as a variable name and `value` can
be replaced with any Python value. Then, to get the value associated with a
variable we just write its name - this is exactly the same as if we'd written
the value in the first place. The following program functions in exactly the
same as the Hello World program we wrote:

```python
message = "Hello, world!"
print(message)
```

The way to read `=` in Python is as *becomes* rather than as a comparison or as a statement (e.g. "my_favourite_number *becomes* 3" rather than "my_favourite_number" *is equal to* 3). This is because values of variables can change over the course of the program.

To see this you can try the following program:

```python
my_favourite_number = 3
print(my_favourite_number) # Prints 3
my_favourite_number = 4
print(my_favourite_number) # Prints 4
```

Variable names in Python begin with a letter or an underscore, followed by a sequence of letters, numbers, or underscores. Letters should be restricted to the Latin letters (a-z) and (A-Z), though Python will allow you to use letters such as щ, Æ, ß, and most other Unicode characters (but please don't). One important restriction is that variable names cannot be the same as any of the **reserved** words in Python (also known as **keywords**), which are the following 35 words: 

| | | | | |
|-|-|-|-|-|
False   |   await    |  else   |    import  |   pass |
None    |   break    |  except |    in      |   raise |
True    |   class    |  finally  |  is    |     return |
and     |   continue  | for     |   lambda   |  try  |
as      |   def  |      from     |  nonlocal  | while |
assert   |  del   |     global    | not      |  with|
async  |    elif  |     if     |    or     |    yield |

For your own variables, try to stick with names which are descriptive of what the variable is supposed to contain.

## Arithmetic Operations

We can use Python to calculate values. Some examples are given below.
```python
print(3 + 4) # Addition
print(3 - 4) # Subtraction
print(3 * 4) # Multiplication
print(3 / 4) # Division
print(3 // 4) # Integer division
print(3 ** 4) # Exponentiation (i.e. calculates 3 to the power of 4)
```

We can also use variables in the place of numbers, e.g.
```python
three = 3
four = 4
print(three + four)
print(3 - four)
print(three * 4)
# ... etc.
```

The order of operations is the same as in mathematics, e.g.
```python
2 ** 2  * 3 ** 2 + 4 ** 2
```
is the same as
```python
((2 ** 2) * (3 ** 2)) + 4 ** 2
```

However, you can always use parentheses if you are not sure about something.

## Data Types

Each variable in Python has a certain type. Some of the most common types are **strings**, **integers** and **floating point numbers** (**float** for short).

| Type | Description | Examples |
|---|--------|-----------------|
Integer | Number without decimal places | `1`,`5`, `15`, `15404505`, `-455`, `0` |
Float | Number with decimal places | `1.5`, `40.4550590`, `1.0`, `53.4`, `-0.588`, `-458.5` |
String | Piece of text | `"a"`, `"boy"`, `"I am a boy!"`, `"I like basketball"`, `"Hello world"`, `"Test"`|

<!-- ### Integers and Floats

We can change constants from an integer to a float by appending `.0` at the end. 

The result of division using `/` will always result in a float. While division using `//` will result in an integer, the result is **rounded down**.

```python
print(7 / 4) # 1.75
print(7 // 4) # 1 (rounded down)
print(8/4) # 2.0 (a float)
print(8//4) # 2 (an integer)
```

For other arithmetic operators mentioned above, they give floats when any of their arguments are floats, while they give integers when all arguments are integers.

```python
print(4+4) # 8 (an integer)
print(8.0-4) # 4.0 (a float)
print(3.8*4) # 15.2 (a float)
print(8**4) # 4096 (an integer)
print(16**0.5) # 4.0 (a float)
```

You could convert integers to floats explicitly using the function `float`, and concert floats to integers explicitly using the function `int` (again, the value is **rounded down**). As demonstrated by the examples here:

```python
float(40) # 40.0
int(48.9) # 48 (rounded down)
```

On first sight, floats seem to be more powerful than integers, as they can store values with decimal places while integers cannot, and both of them can be used to store integral values. 

However, this is not the case. Floats cannot store numbers exactly and will result in rounding errors. It is more reliable to use integers whenever possible.

```python
30000000000000000000000001-30000000000000000000000000 # 1
30000000000000000000000001.0-30000000000000000000000000.0 #0.0

int(30000000000000000000000001.0) #30000000000000000570425344 -->
```

### Strings

We called `"Hello, world!"` a **string**, i.e. a piece of text that appears in
our source code that we can either print or manipulate. 

We are surrounding strings in double/single quotes so as to distinguish strings from keywords in Python.

One such example is that we can split this string in two:

```python
print("Hello, " + "world!")
```

Here Python will join (`+`) the two strings together to form one string that is
then given to the `print` function.

You could convert strings to integers and floats using the `int` and `float` functions respectively. You could also convert integers and floats to strings using the function `str`.

```python
int("4") # 4
str(4096.5) # '4096.5'
int("Hello!") # This will cause Python to crash. "Hello!" is not a number!
```

## Reading input

We often want our programs to take some kind of input from the user. For example, lets create a program, which prints a personalised greeting. Create a new file and try the following program:

```python
name = input("Please enter your name: ")
print("Hi, " + name + "!")
```

Try running this in IDLE, then typing in your name, and pressing Enter. You should get a personalised greeting. Here is what is happening: when you call the `input` function, it will print the message you give it as an argument, and then wait for the user to enter some kind of input. Note that this input is treated as a **string**. In this case, we choose to store this input in the variable called `name`. 
After that, we just join the strings we received, and print the result.

Now, lets create a program, which multiplies your favourite number by 2. This would look like:

```python
your_favourite_number = input("Please enter your favourite number: ")
print("Your favourite number times two is: " + 2 * your_favourite_number)
```

The code looks alright, but something weird happened when you try to run it...

```
Please enter your favourite number: 4096
Your favourite number times two is: 40964096
```

Instead of multiplying the number by two, it repeats the number two times. To understand that, you may try to run

```python
"text" * 2 # 'texttext'
```

Python actually defined "multiplcation" of strings as repeating the string for the specified number of times. (And also string "addition", as you have seen earlier)

When the `input` function receives a value it treats it like a **string**. So in order to perform arithmetic operations on our value, we have to tell Python to **convert** it to the appropriate type - in this case **integer**. 

To be safe we also should covert intergers and floats to strings using `str` when printing them out

```python
your_favourite_number = int(input("Please enter your favourite number: "))
print("Your favourite number times two is: " + str(2 * your_favourite_number))
```
## Worked example: Celsius to Fahrenheit

°F = 9/5 * °C + 32

```python
c = float(input("Input temperature in Celsius: "))
f = 9 / 5 * c + 32
print(str(c) + " Celsius = " + str(f) + " Fahrenheit")
```

## Sneak Peak - If Statements

We often want our programs to adapt their behaviour based on the input they receive. For instance, lets say we want to create a program, which tells our user if the number they input is small (e.g. less than 10). This is what the next program does:

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if number < 10:
  print(number + " is a small number.")
```

We could also have our program say something if the number is large as well:

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if number < 10:
  print(number + " is a small number.")
else:
  print(number + " is a large number.")
```

We will discuss more on if statements in the next session.

## Exercise

*When attempting these exercises, I suggest you type out the code by hand, rather than copy-pasting it. Pay attention to all of the symbols you are typing and see if you can recall why they are there.*

1) Try to write a similar program that converts Fahrenheit to Celsius

    (°F − 32) × 5/9 = °C

2)  **One detector:** create a program, which takes an input (an int) and outputs "This number is 1" if the input was 1 and "This input was not 1" otherwise.

3) **Subtraction:** create a program, which takes two integers, and outputs the result of the larger number subtracting the smaller number.

  ```python
  first = ________(input("Input first number: "))
  second = ________(input("Input second number: "))
  if ________ < ________:
      #swap the two numbers
  answer = first - second
  print("The answer of "+str(first)+"-"+str(second)+" is " + str(answer))
  ```
  ```
  Samples:
  Input first number: 4
  Input second number: 3
  The answer of 4-3 is 1

  Input first number: 3
  Input second number: 4
  The answer of 4-3 is 1
  ```

## More exercises

4)  Now try to combine the two programs mentioned, so that you print out the person's name, as well as their favourite number multiplied by two.

5)  **Average of two numbers:** create a program which takes as input two numbers and computes their average. We will generalise the program to calculate the average of more than two numbers in the next few sessions.

6) **Odd detector:** create a program, which takes an input (an int) and outputs "This number is odd" if the input was 1 and "This input was not odd" otherwise. (*You will need to use the operator %. a % b gives the remainder when a is divided by b*)
## Want more?

Check out [this Python tutorial playlist][bucky]! We covered videos 1,2,3,7 this session but feel free to watch and learn more and learn. In fact that is how I learnt Python.

 <!-- ## Good resources to look at

 * [Khanacademy][] - good for learning about computer science and computational
   thinking

 * [Codecademy][] - excellent introductory courses in different programming
   languages. Note that they currently use Python 2.x, whereas we are using
   Python 3.x

 * [Project Euler][euler] - programming challenges, probably a good place to
   practice after a couple of weeks

 * [Learn Python the Hard Way](https://learnpythonthehardway.org/python3/)

[khanacademy]: http://khanacademy.org
[codecademy]: http://codecademy.com
[euler]: http://projecteuler.net -->

Commit message:

Extend and isolate setup instructions

session1/Notes.md, after:

# Session 1: Introduction to Python

*Watch videos 1, 2, 3, 7 of this Python tutorial playlist if you missed this session: [link][bucky]*

The first thing that you’ll need to do is make sure you have Python installed on your
computer. You can find information on how to do that [here][install].

[bucky]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HBxCHonP6Ro&list=PL6gx4Cwl9DGAcbMi1sH6oAMk4JHw91mC_&index=1
[install]: https://github.com/oxcompsoc/learntocode/tree/master/session0

Throughout these documents note that text in a `monospaced font` is Python code.

## Information about CompSoc
The [Oxford University Computer Society][compsoc] was founded in 1978, making
it one of the oldest university computing societies in the country. 

This year, we will be holding Thursday Talks from both academics and sponsors / Workshops on Thursdays. Learn to code and socials on Saturdays (Weeks 2-7 7pm).

[Refer to our website for more and latest details of all events.][compsoc]

[compsoc]: https://ox.compsoc.net

## Background

### What is a programming language?

A programming language is a way for humans to tell computers what sort of computation they want done. Up until quite recently - and arguably even still - computers have not been able to interpret natural language i.e. plain English instructions perfectly. So the programmer translates plain language directions into a programming language.

"Show me the words 'Hello, world!'" -> `print("Hello, world!")`

<!-- Of course, computers "think" in electrical signals, not in words. So the programming language needs to be translated again, into machine language: pure ones and zeroes.  -->
<!-- This is the job of the **compiler** or **interpreter**.

Compiling and interpreting are the two different ways that programming languages are translate into machine code.  -->
<!-- Giving your code to a compiler is like giving a translator a manuscript and asking them to give you a fully translated version, whereas giving your code to an interpreter is like asking the translator to read the manuscript line-by-line. -->

### Why Python?

Python is a highly readable interpreted language that can be used for virtually anything because of its extensive library of packages. It finds use across virtually every single branch of computer science, and it's a go-to for when you need to make a quick proof-of-concept or prototype a new idea.
<!-- Because it's an interpreted language, you can make small adjustments to your code and see the changes in the resultant output faster than if it were a compiled language -->

## Our first program - Hello, world!

The programs that we are going to be writing in this course will all be
text-based, i.e. they can take text that you enter as input and produce text as
output. Although this might seem limited in the age of animated, interactive
apps they provide us with a strong foundation for programming.

One of the most basic programs we can write is one that just outputs some text.
In a new file in IDLE (or empty editor on `repl.it`) enter the Python program from the above section:

```python
print("Hello, world!")
```

In IDLE, then click **Run > Run Module** (or F5) or click the run button on
`repl.it`. IDLE will then run the program in the prompt window, and you should
see the output `"Hello, world!"`.


There are three elements to consider here:
* `print` is the name of a **function**. Functions are pieces of code that do
  something and/or calculate something. The `print` function outputs text.
  (Historically, some of the earliest computers used physical printers as
  their primary form of output)
* `( )` (parentheses) are used to indicate that we are **calling** the function
  `print`, i.e. that we are telling Python to execute the `print` function
* `"Hello, world!"` is the **argument** to the function `print`, i.e. the text
  that we would like the code inside the `print` function to output. You'll
  notice that when the text is printed the quote marks are missing -
  this is because we have to indicate to Python that the argument is text,
  rather than other symbols. We call text that appears in programs like this
  **strings**

## Comments

Throughout the next examples, you will see some text written after a `#` symbol. These are called **comments**, and we will use them to explain and document our code. In Python, any text after a `#` on that line is not considered as part of the program. So we could have written our first program as:

```python
# this is the first comment
spam = 1  # and this is the second comment
          # ... and now a third!
text = "# This is not a comment because it's inside quotes."
print("Hello, world!") # Prints Hello, world!
```

## Variables

Python programs store data in **variables**. A variable is a bit like a box that has a name, and inside the box we can store values. The value stored could be changed based on user input, or as the program moves on. In Python, we have to put some value in our box when we create it. You can try:

```python
greeting1 = "Hello!" # The box named 'greeting1' now contains the string "Hello!"
my_favourite_number = 3 # The box named 'my_favourite_number' now contains the integer 3 
pi = 3.14 # The box named 'pi' now contains the floating point number 3.14
_underscore = "_" # The box named '_underscore' now contains the string "_"

print(greeting1) # Prints 'Hello!'
print(my_favourite_number) # Prints '3'
print(pi) # Prints '3.14'
print(_underscore) # Prints '_'
```

This created four variables, called `greeting1`, `my_favourite_number`, `pi`, and `_underscore` and then printed the values they store.

To assign a value to a variable we write `name = value` where `name` can be
replaced with any piece of text that Python allows as a variable name and `value` can
be replaced with any Python value. Then, to get the value associated with a
variable we just write its name - this is exactly the same as if we'd written
the value in the first place. The following program functions in exactly the
same as the Hello World program we wrote:

```python
message = "Hello, world!"
print(message)
```

The way to read `=` in Python is as *becomes* rather than as a comparison or as a statement (e.g. "my_favourite_number *becomes* 3" rather than "my_favourite_number" *is equal to* 3). This is because values of variables can change over the course of the program.

To see this you can try the following program:

```python
my_favourite_number = 3
print(my_favourite_number) # Prints 3
my_favourite_number = 4
print(my_favourite_number) # Prints 4
```

Variable names in Python begin with a letter or an underscore, followed by a sequence of letters, numbers, or underscores. Letters should be restricted to the Latin letters (a-z) and (A-Z), though Python will allow you to use letters such as щ, Æ, ß, and most other Unicode characters (but please don't). One important restriction is that variable names cannot be the same as any of the **reserved** words in Python (also known as **keywords**), which are the following 35 words: 

| | | | | |
|-|-|-|-|-|
False   |   await    |  else   |    import  |   pass |
None    |   break    |  except |    in      |   raise |
True    |   class    |  finally  |  is    |     return |
and     |   continue  | for     |   lambda   |  try  |
as      |   def  |      from     |  nonlocal  | while |
assert   |  del   |     global    | not      |  with|
async  |    elif  |     if     |    or     |    yield |

For your own variables, try to stick with names which are descriptive of what the variable is supposed to contain.

## Arithmetic Operations

We can use Python to calculate values. Some examples are given below.
```python
print(3 + 4) # Addition
print(3 - 4) # Subtraction
print(3 * 4) # Multiplication
print(3 / 4) # Division
print(3 // 4) # Integer division
print(3 ** 4) # Exponentiation (i.e. calculates 3 to the power of 4)
```

We can also use variables in the place of numbers, e.g.
```python
three = 3
four = 4
print(three + four)
print(3 - four)
print(three * 4)
# ... etc.
```

The order of operations is the same as in mathematics, e.g.
```python
2 ** 2  * 3 ** 2 + 4 ** 2
```
is the same as
```python
((2 ** 2) * (3 ** 2)) + 4 ** 2
```

However, you can always use parentheses if you are not sure about something.

## Data Types

Each variable in Python has a certain type. Some of the most common types are **strings**, **integers** and **floating point numbers** (**float** for short).

| Type | Description | Examples |
|---|--------|-----------------|
Integer | Number without decimal places | `1`,`5`, `15`, `15404505`, `-455`, `0` |
Float | Number with decimal places | `1.5`, `40.4550590`, `1.0`, `53.4`, `-0.588`, `-458.5` |
String | Piece of text | `"a"`, `"boy"`, `"I am a boy!"`, `"I like basketball"`, `"Hello world"`, `"Test"`|

<!-- ### Integers and Floats

We can change constants from an integer to a float by appending `.0` at the end. 

The result of division using `/` will always result in a float. While division using `//` will result in an integer, the result is **rounded down**.

```python
print(7 / 4) # 1.75
print(7 // 4) # 1 (rounded down)
print(8/4) # 2.0 (a float)
print(8//4) # 2 (an integer)
```

For other arithmetic operators mentioned above, they give floats when any of their arguments are floats, while they give integers when all arguments are integers.

```python
print(4+4) # 8 (an integer)
print(8.0-4) # 4.0 (a float)
print(3.8*4) # 15.2 (a float)
print(8**4) # 4096 (an integer)
print(16**0.5) # 4.0 (a float)
```

You could convert integers to floats explicitly using the function `float`, and concert floats to integers explicitly using the function `int` (again, the value is **rounded down**). As demonstrated by the examples here:

```python
float(40) # 40.0
int(48.9) # 48 (rounded down)
```

On first sight, floats seem to be more powerful than integers, as they can store values with decimal places while integers cannot, and both of them can be used to store integral values. 

However, this is not the case. Floats cannot store numbers exactly and will result in rounding errors. It is more reliable to use integers whenever possible.

```python
30000000000000000000000001-30000000000000000000000000 # 1
30000000000000000000000001.0-30000000000000000000000000.0 #0.0

int(30000000000000000000000001.0) #30000000000000000570425344 -->
```

### Strings

We called `"Hello, world!"` a **string**, i.e. a piece of text that appears in
our source code that we can either print or manipulate. 

We are surrounding strings in double/single quotes so as to distinguish strings from keywords in Python.

One such example is that we can split this string in two:

```python
print("Hello, " + "world!")
```

Here Python will join (`+`) the two strings together to form one string that is
then given to the `print` function.

You could convert strings to integers and floats using the `int` and `float` functions respectively. You could also convert integers and floats to strings using the function `str`.

```python
int("4") # 4
str(4096.5) # '4096.5'
int("Hello!") # This will cause Python to crash. "Hello!" is not a number!
```

## Reading input

We often want our programs to take some kind of input from the user. For example, lets create a program, which prints a personalised greeting. Create a new file and try the following program:

```python
name = input("Please enter your name: ")
print("Hi, " + name + "!")
```

Try running this in IDLE, then typing in your name, and pressing Enter. You should get a personalised greeting. Here is what is happening: when you call the `input` function, it will print the message you give it as an argument, and then wait for the user to enter some kind of input. Note that this input is treated as a **string**. In this case, we choose to store this input in the variable called `name`. 
After that, we just join the strings we received, and print the result.

Now, lets create a program, which multiplies your favourite number by 2. This would look like:

```python
your_favourite_number = input("Please enter your favourite number: ")
print("Your favourite number times two is: " + 2 * your_favourite_number)
```

The code looks alright, but something weird happened when you try to run it...

```
Please enter your favourite number: 4096
Your favourite number times two is: 40964096
```

Instead of multiplying the number by two, it repeats the number two times. To understand that, you may try to run

```python
"text" * 2 # 'texttext'
```

Python actually defined "multiplcation" of strings as repeating the string for the specified number of times. (And also string "addition", as you have seen earlier)

When the `input` function receives a value it treats it like a **string**. So in order to perform arithmetic operations on our value, we have to tell Python to **convert** it to the appropriate type - in this case **integer**. 

To be safe we also should covert intergers and floats to strings using `str` when printing them out

```python
your_favourite_number = int(input("Please enter your favourite number: "))
print("Your favourite number times two is: " + str(2 * your_favourite_number))
```
## Worked example: Celsius to Fahrenheit

°F = 9/5 * °C + 32

```python
c = float(input("Input temperature in Celsius: "))
f = 9 / 5 * c + 32
print(str(c) + " Celsius = " + str(f) + " Fahrenheit")
```

## Sneak Peak - If Statements

We often want our programs to adapt their behaviour based on the input they receive. For instance, lets say we want to create a program, which tells our user if the number they input is small (e.g. less than 10). This is what the next program does:

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if number < 10:
  print(number + " is a small number.")
```

We could also have our program say something if the number is large as well:

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if number < 10:
  print(number + " is a small number.")
else:
  print(number + " is a large number.")
```

We will discuss more on if statements in the next session.

## Exercise

*When attempting these exercises, I suggest you type out the code by hand, rather than copy-pasting it. Pay attention to all of the symbols you are typing and see if you can recall why they are there.*

1) Try to write a similar program that converts Fahrenheit to Celsius

    (°F − 32) × 5/9 = °C

2)  **One detector:** create a program, which takes an input (an int) and outputs "This number is 1" if the input was 1 and "This input was not 1" otherwise.

3) **Subtraction:** create a program, which takes two integers, and outputs the result of the larger number subtracting the smaller number.

  ```python
  first = ________(input("Input first number: "))
  second = ________(input("Input second number: "))
  if ________ < ________:
      #swap the two numbers
  answer = first - second
  print("The answer of "+str(first)+"-"+str(second)+" is " + str(answer))
  ```
  ```
  Samples:
  Input first number: 4
  Input second number: 3
  The answer of 4-3 is 1

  Input first number: 3
  Input second number: 4
  The answer of 4-3 is 1
  ```

## More exercises

4)  Now try to combine the two programs mentioned, so that you print out the person's name, as well as their favourite number multiplied by two.

5)  **Average of two numbers:** create a program which takes as input two numbers and computes their average. We will generalise the program to calculate the average of more than two numbers in the next few sessions.

6) **Odd detector:** create a program, which takes an input (an int) and outputs "This number is odd" if the input was 1 and "This input was not odd" otherwise. (*You will need to use the operator %. a % b gives the remainder when a is divided by b*)
## Want more?

Check out [this Python tutorial playlist][bucky]! We covered videos 1,2,3,7 this session but feel free to watch and learn more and learn. In fact that is how I learnt Python.

 <!-- ## Good resources to look at

 * [Khanacademy][] - good for learning about computer science and computational
   thinking

 * [Codecademy][] - excellent introductory courses in different programming
   languages. Note that they currently use Python 2.x, whereas we are using
   Python 3.x

 * [Project Euler][euler] - programming challenges, probably a good place to
   practice after a couple of weeks

 * [Learn Python the Hard Way](https://learnpythonthehardway.org/python3/)

[khanacademy]: http://khanacademy.org
[codecademy]: http://codecademy.com
[euler]: http://projecteuler.net -->
