session1/README.md, before:

# Session 1: Introduction to Python

The first thing that you’ll need to do is install Python installed on your
computer. You can find information on how to do that [here][install].

[install]: https://github.com/oxcompsoc/learntocode/tree/master/session0

Throughout these documents note that text in a `monospaced font` is Python code.

## Information about CompSoc

The [Oxford University Computer Society][compsoc] was founded in 1978, making
it one of the oldest university computing societies in the country. Today we
host regular talks from large companies, geek nights each Saturday, and Learn
to Code each Hilary Term. Later this term we'll be celebrating our 40th
anniversary with a dinner welcoming back former members.

[compsoc]: https://ox.compsoc.net

## Visual Studio Code

If you have gone through Session 0, you should have a program called Visual Studio Code installed on your computer. We suggest creating a new folder somewhere on your computer to store all of the examples and code from the course (maybe call this folder `learn_to_code`). Once you create that folder open Visual Studio Code, then click **File > Open Folder** and navigate to your newly created folder. Once there, you can create new files by clicking **File > New File**. Then click **File > Save As...** to save your file. For now you should name all files using only letters, numbers, and underscores, and ending with `.py`, e.g. `program1.py`, `first_program.py`, etc. 

**IMPORTANT: After making changes to a file, you must click File > Save before trying to run the program again, otherwise Python will not know about the changes!**
### Problems installing Python

If you can't get Python installed on your computer, don't worry! Instead,
please go to [this website][replit], which allows you to run Python programs
online. All our examples (until the final session) should run fine in the online version as well, though we strongly recommend installing Python on your own computer to get the most out of this course.

[replit]: http://repl.it/languages/python3

## Hello, world

The programs that we are going to be writing in this course will all be
text-based, i.e. they can take text that you enter as input and produce text as
output. Although this might seem limited in the age of animated, interactive
apps they provide us with a strong foundation for programming.

One of the most basic programs we can write is one that just outputs some text.

Now, create a new file in Visual Studio Code. Then type in this program in your file:

```python
print("Hello, world!")
```

Now, in Visual Studio Code, click **View > Terminal** to open up a terminal window. In that window, type in:
```
python hello_world.py
```

You should see ``Hello, world!`` printed out in the terminal.


There are three elements to consider here:

* `print` is the name of a **function**. Functions are pieces of code that do
  something and/or calculate something. The `print` function outputs text
  (historically, the some of the earliest computers used physical printers as
  their primary form of output)
* `( )` (parentheses) are used to indicate that we are **calling** the function
  `print`, i.e. that we are telling Python to execute the `print` function
* `"Hello, world!"` is the **argument** to the function `print`, i.e. the text
  that we would like the code inside the `print` function to output. You'll
  notice that when the text is printed the quote marks are missing -
  this is because we have to indicate to Python that the argument is text,
  rather than other symbols. We call text that appears in programs like this
  **strings**

## Strings

We called `"Hello, world!"` a **string**, i.e. a piece of text that appears in
our source code that we can either print or manipulate. One such example is
that we can split this string in two:

```python
print("Hello, " + "world!")
```

Here Python will join (`+`) the two strings together to form one string that is
then given to the `print` function.

**Exercise:** there are many other ways to manipulate strings in Python.
Investigate how to multiply a string or convert it to uppercase/lowercase.

## Comments

Thorughout the next examples, you will see some text written after a `#` symbol. These are called comments, and we will use them to explain and document our code. In Python, any text after a `#` on that line is not considered as part of the program. So we could have written our first program as:

```python
print("Hello, world!") # Prints Hello, world!
```

## Variables

Python programs store data in **variables**. A variable is a bit like a box that has a name, and inside the box we can store values. In Python, we have to put some value in our box when we create it. Here are a few examples:

```python
greeting1 = "Hello!" # The box named 'greeting1' now contains the string "Hello!"
my_favourite_number = 3 # The box named 'my_favourite_number' now contains the integer 3 
pi = 3.14 # The box named 'pi' now contains the floating point number 3.14
_underscore = "_" # The box named '_underscore' now contains the string "_"
```

This created four variables, called `greeting1`, `my_favourite_number`, `pi`, and `_underscore`. 

To assign a value to a variable we write `name = value` where `name` can be
replaced with any piece of text that Python allows as a variable name and `value` can
be replaced with any Python value. Then, to get the value associated with a
variable we just write its name - this is exactly the same as if we'd written
the value in the first place. The following program functions in exactly the
same as the `hello_world.py` program we wrote:

```python
message = "Hello, world!"
print(message)
```

The way to read `=` in Python is as *becomes* rather than as a comparison or as a statement (e.g. "my_favourite_number *becomes* 3" rather than "my_favourite_number" *is equal to* 3). This is because values of variables can change over the course of the program.

To see this you can try the following program:

```python
my_favourite_number = 3
print(my_favourite_number) # Prints 3
my_favourite_number = 4
print(my_favourite_number) # Prints 4
```

Variable names in Python begin with a letter or an undersocre, followed by a sequence of letters, numbers, or underscores. Letters should be restricted to the latin letters (a-z) and (A-Z), though Python will allow you to use letters such as щ, Æ, ß, and most other Unicode characters (but please don't). One important restriction is that variable names cannot be the same as any of the **reserved** words in Python (also known as **keywords**), which are the following 35 words: 

| | | | | |
|-|-|-|-|-|
False   |   await    |  else   |    import  |   pass |
None    |   break    |  except |    in      |   raise |
True    |   class    |  finally  |  is    |     return |
and     |   continue  | for     |   lambda   |  try  |
as      |   def  |      from     |  nonlocal  | while |
assert   |  del   |     global    | not      |  with|
async  |    elif  |     if     |    or     |    yield |

For your own variables, try to stick with names which are descriptive of what the variable is supposed to contain.

## Expressions

We can use Python to calculate values. Some examples are given below.
```python
print(3 + 4) # Addition
print(3 - 4) # Subtraction
print(3 * 4) # Multiplication
print(3 / 4) # Division
print(3 // 4) # Integer division
print(3 ** 4) # Exponentiation (i.e. calculates 3 to the power of 4)
```

We can also use variables in the place of numbers, e.g.
```python
three = 3
four = 4
print(three + four)
print(3 - four)
print(three * 4)
# ... etc.
```

The order of operations is the same as in mathematics, e.g.
```python
2 ** 2  * 3 ** 2 + 4 ** 2
```
is the same as
```python
((2 ** 2) * (3 ** 2)) + 4 ** 2
```

However, you can always use peretheses if you are not sure about something.

## Reading input

We often want our programs to take some kind of input from the user. For example, lets create a program, which prints a personalised greeting. Create a new file, called `greeting.py` as before. Then, try the following program:

```python
name = input("Please enter your name: ")
print("Hi, " + name + "!")
```

Try running this in the terminal, typing in your name, and pressing Enter. You should get a personalised greeting. Here is what is happening: when you call the `input` function, it will print the message you give it as an argument, and then wait for the user to enter some kind of input. Note that this input is treated as a **string**. In this case, we choose to store this input in the variable called `name`. 
After that, we just join the strings we received, and print the result.

Now, lets create a program, which multiplies your favourite number by 2. This would look like:

```python
your_favourite_number = int(input("Please enter your favourite number: "))
print("Your favourite number times two is: " + str(2 * your_favourite_number))
```

**Excercise: try to remove the `int` from the last program and see what happens.**

**Excercise: now try to combine the last two programs, so that you print out the person's name, as well as their favourite number.**

Each variable in python has a certain type. Some of the most common types are **strings**, **integers** and **floating point numbers**. When the `input` function receives a value it treats is as if it were of type **string**. So in order to perform arithmetic operations on our value, we have to tell Python to **convert** it to the appropriate type - in this case **integer**. In general, we write `type_name(expression)` to ask Python to give us `expression` interpreted as the type `type_name`. So e.g.

```python
three = int("3") # Interpret "3" as an int (short for integer)
pi = float("3.14") # Interpret "3.14" as a float (short for floating point number)
three_as_a_string = str(3) # Interpret 3 as a str (short for string)
number = int("Hello!") # This will cause Python to crash. "Hello!" is not a number!
``` 

## If statements

We often want our programs to adapt their behaviour based on the input they receive. For instance, lets say we want to create a program, which tells our user if the number they input is small (e.g. less than 10). This is what the next program does:

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if number < 10:
  print(number + " is a small number.")
```

We could also have our program say something if the number is large as well:

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if number < 10:
  print(number + " is a small number.")
else:
  print(number + " is a large number.")
```


We can read the above as
> if "this condition is true" then "execute this code", otherwise "execute this other code"

We can generalise the first example as:

```python
if condition_is_true:
    execute_this_code
```

And the second one as:

```python
if condition_is_true:
    execute_this_code
else:
    this_code_is_executed_otherwise
```

Notice that we write "then" as `:`. The most important thing to notice is that we execute the indented code *only* when the condition holds.

We can write any number of statements inside the **body** of the `if`
statement, i.e. statements that are intended (press `TAB`) will only be
executed if they the condition of the `if` statement holds.

There are several important concepts to note here:

 * If we want to compare two values (e.g. the value the user entered and a fixed
   string) we use `==` instead of `=`
 * We can compare numbers and strings using the comparison operators `==`, `!=`,
   `<=`, `>=`, `<`, and `>`
 * If statements can be nested

We can also abbreviate the following:

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if number < 10:
  print(number + " is a small number.")
else:
  if number >= 10 and number < 100:
    print(number + " is not small, but not large either.")
  else:
    print(number + " is a large number.")
```

to

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if number < 10:
  print(number + " is a small number.")
elif number >= 10 and number < 100:
  print(number + " is not small, but not large either.")
else:
  print(number + " is a large number.")
```

You can have as many `elif` branches as you like, but only one `if` branch and
one `else` branch, which must appear at the beginning and end respectively.

Here we used the keyword `and` to mean that we want both `number >= 10` and `number < 100` to be true for that branch to be executed. You could use `or` and `not` in expressions, e.g.

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if not number < 10:
  # Will be executed if number is not less than 10 (i.e. if number >= 10)
  print("The number is not less than 10.")

if number == 3 or number == 4:
  # Will be executed if number is equal to 3 or equal to 4
  # Note that comparison is done with == rather than =
  print("The number is either 3 or 4.")
```
If you are using multiple different connectives, you should include parentheses to make it clear how the expression should be interpreted. E.g.

```python
number = input("Please enter a number: ")
if ((1 <= number and number < 10)) or number == 42) and (not number == 3):
  print("This was the number: " + number)
```

This code will only print `number` if it is one of the numbers [0, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 42].


## Good resources to look at

 * [Khanacademy][] - good for learning about computer science and computational
   thinking

 * [Codecademy][] - excellent introductory courses in different programming
   languages. Note that they currently use Python 2.x, whereas we are using
   Python 3.x

 * [Project Euler][euler] - programming challenges, probably a good place to
   practice after a couple of weeks

 * [Learn Python the Hard Way](https://learnpythonthehardway.org/python3/)

[khanacademy]: http://khanacademy.org
[codecademy]: http://codecademy.com
[euler]: http://projecteuler.net

## Exercise

 * **Computer number guessing game:** rather than have you guess the number,
   have the computer try and determine it instead. How can you ensure that the
   computer makes as few guesses as possible?

<!---2020 --->

Commit message:

rem guessing game, add avg

session1/README.md, after:

# Session 1: Introduction to Python

The first thing that you’ll need to do is install Python installed on your
computer. You can find information on how to do that [here][install].

[install]: https://github.com/oxcompsoc/learntocode/tree/master/session0

Throughout these documents note that text in a `monospaced font` is Python code.

## Information about CompSoc

The [Oxford University Computer Society][compsoc] was founded in 1978, making
it one of the oldest university computing societies in the country. Today we
host regular talks from large companies, geek nights each Saturday, and Learn
to Code each Hilary Term. Later this term we'll be celebrating our 40th
anniversary with a dinner welcoming back former members.

[compsoc]: https://ox.compsoc.net

## Visual Studio Code

If you have gone through Session 0, you should have a program called Visual Studio Code installed on your computer. We suggest creating a new folder somewhere on your computer to store all of the examples and code from the course (maybe call this folder `learn_to_code`). Once you create that folder open Visual Studio Code, then click **File > Open Folder** and navigate to your newly created folder. Once there, you can create new files by clicking **File > New File**. Then click **File > Save As...** to save your file. For now you should name all files using only letters, numbers, and underscores, and ending with `.py`, e.g. `program1.py`, `first_program.py`, etc. 

**IMPORTANT: After making changes to a file, you must click File > Save before trying to run the program again, otherwise Python will not know about the changes!**
### Problems installing Python

If you can't get Python installed on your computer, don't worry! Instead,
please go to [this website][replit], which allows you to run Python programs
online. All our examples (until the final session) should run fine in the online version as well, though we strongly recommend installing Python on your own computer to get the most out of this course.

[replit]: http://repl.it/languages/python3

## Hello, world

The programs that we are going to be writing in this course will all be
text-based, i.e. they can take text that you enter as input and produce text as
output. Although this might seem limited in the age of animated, interactive
apps they provide us with a strong foundation for programming.

One of the most basic programs we can write is one that just outputs some text.

Now, create a new file in Visual Studio Code. Then type in this program in your file:

```python
print("Hello, world!")
```

Now, in Visual Studio Code, click **View > Terminal** to open up a terminal window. In that window, type in:
```
python hello_world.py
```

You should see ``Hello, world!`` printed out in the terminal.


There are three elements to consider here:

* `print` is the name of a **function**. Functions are pieces of code that do
  something and/or calculate something. The `print` function outputs text
  (historically, the some of the earliest computers used physical printers as
  their primary form of output)
* `( )` (parentheses) are used to indicate that we are **calling** the function
  `print`, i.e. that we are telling Python to execute the `print` function
* `"Hello, world!"` is the **argument** to the function `print`, i.e. the text
  that we would like the code inside the `print` function to output. You'll
  notice that when the text is printed the quote marks are missing -
  this is because we have to indicate to Python that the argument is text,
  rather than other symbols. We call text that appears in programs like this
  **strings**

## Strings

We called `"Hello, world!"` a **string**, i.e. a piece of text that appears in
our source code that we can either print or manipulate. One such example is
that we can split this string in two:

```python
print("Hello, " + "world!")
```

Here Python will join (`+`) the two strings together to form one string that is
then given to the `print` function.

**Exercise:** there are many other ways to manipulate strings in Python.
Investigate how to multiply a string or convert it to uppercase/lowercase.

## Comments

Thorughout the next examples, you will see some text written after a `#` symbol. These are called comments, and we will use them to explain and document our code. In Python, any text after a `#` on that line is not considered as part of the program. So we could have written our first program as:

```python
print("Hello, world!") # Prints Hello, world!
```

## Variables

Python programs store data in **variables**. A variable is a bit like a box that has a name, and inside the box we can store values. In Python, we have to put some value in our box when we create it. Here are a few examples:

```python
greeting1 = "Hello!" # The box named 'greeting1' now contains the string "Hello!"
my_favourite_number = 3 # The box named 'my_favourite_number' now contains the integer 3 
pi = 3.14 # The box named 'pi' now contains the floating point number 3.14
_underscore = "_" # The box named '_underscore' now contains the string "_"
```

This created four variables, called `greeting1`, `my_favourite_number`, `pi`, and `_underscore`. 

To assign a value to a variable we write `name = value` where `name` can be
replaced with any piece of text that Python allows as a variable name and `value` can
be replaced with any Python value. Then, to get the value associated with a
variable we just write its name - this is exactly the same as if we'd written
the value in the first place. The following program functions in exactly the
same as the `hello_world.py` program we wrote:

```python
message = "Hello, world!"
print(message)
```

The way to read `=` in Python is as *becomes* rather than as a comparison or as a statement (e.g. "my_favourite_number *becomes* 3" rather than "my_favourite_number" *is equal to* 3). This is because values of variables can change over the course of the program.

To see this you can try the following program:

```python
my_favourite_number = 3
print(my_favourite_number) # Prints 3
my_favourite_number = 4
print(my_favourite_number) # Prints 4
```

Variable names in Python begin with a letter or an undersocre, followed by a sequence of letters, numbers, or underscores. Letters should be restricted to the latin letters (a-z) and (A-Z), though Python will allow you to use letters such as щ, Æ, ß, and most other Unicode characters (but please don't). One important restriction is that variable names cannot be the same as any of the **reserved** words in Python (also known as **keywords**), which are the following 35 words: 

| | | | | |
|-|-|-|-|-|
False   |   await    |  else   |    import  |   pass |
None    |   break    |  except |    in      |   raise |
True    |   class    |  finally  |  is    |     return |
and     |   continue  | for     |   lambda   |  try  |
as      |   def  |      from     |  nonlocal  | while |
assert   |  del   |     global    | not      |  with|
async  |    elif  |     if     |    or     |    yield |

For your own variables, try to stick with names which are descriptive of what the variable is supposed to contain.

## Expressions

We can use Python to calculate values. Some examples are given below.
```python
print(3 + 4) # Addition
print(3 - 4) # Subtraction
print(3 * 4) # Multiplication
print(3 / 4) # Division
print(3 // 4) # Integer division
print(3 ** 4) # Exponentiation (i.e. calculates 3 to the power of 4)
```

We can also use variables in the place of numbers, e.g.
```python
three = 3
four = 4
print(three + four)
print(3 - four)
print(three * 4)
# ... etc.
```

The order of operations is the same as in mathematics, e.g.
```python
2 ** 2  * 3 ** 2 + 4 ** 2
```
is the same as
```python
((2 ** 2) * (3 ** 2)) + 4 ** 2
```

However, you can always use peretheses if you are not sure about something.

## Reading input

We often want our programs to take some kind of input from the user. For example, lets create a program, which prints a personalised greeting. Create a new file, called `greeting.py` as before. Then, try the following program:

```python
name = input("Please enter your name: ")
print("Hi, " + name + "!")
```

Try running this in the terminal, typing in your name, and pressing Enter. You should get a personalised greeting. Here is what is happening: when you call the `input` function, it will print the message you give it as an argument, and then wait for the user to enter some kind of input. Note that this input is treated as a **string**. In this case, we choose to store this input in the variable called `name`. 
After that, we just join the strings we received, and print the result.

Now, lets create a program, which multiplies your favourite number by 2. This would look like:

```python
your_favourite_number = int(input("Please enter your favourite number: "))
print("Your favourite number times two is: " + str(2 * your_favourite_number))
```

**Excercise: try to remove the `int` from the last program and see what happens.**

**Excercise: now try to combine the last two programs, so that you print out the person's name, as well as their favourite number.**

Each variable in python has a certain type. Some of the most common types are **strings**, **integers** and **floating point numbers**. When the `input` function receives a value it treats is as if it were of type **string**. So in order to perform arithmetic operations on our value, we have to tell Python to **convert** it to the appropriate type - in this case **integer**. In general, we write `type_name(expression)` to ask Python to give us `expression` interpreted as the type `type_name`. So e.g.

```python
three = int("3") # Interpret "3" as an int (short for integer)
pi = float("3.14") # Interpret "3.14" as a float (short for floating point number)
three_as_a_string = str(3) # Interpret 3 as a str (short for string)
number = int("Hello!") # This will cause Python to crash. "Hello!" is not a number!
``` 

## If statements

We often want our programs to adapt their behaviour based on the input they receive. For instance, lets say we want to create a program, which tells our user if the number they input is small (e.g. less than 10). This is what the next program does:

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if number < 10:
  print(number + " is a small number.")
```

We could also have our program say something if the number is large as well:

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if number < 10:
  print(number + " is a small number.")
else:
  print(number + " is a large number.")
```


We can read the above as
> if "this condition is true" then "execute this code", otherwise "execute this other code"

We can generalise the first example as:

```python
if condition_is_true:
    execute_this_code
```

And the second one as:

```python
if condition_is_true:
    execute_this_code
else:
    this_code_is_executed_otherwise
```

Notice that we write "then" as `:`. The most important thing to notice is that we execute the indented code *only* when the condition holds.

We can write any number of statements inside the **body** of the `if`
statement, i.e. statements that are intended (press `TAB`) will only be
executed if they the condition of the `if` statement holds.

There are several important concepts to note here:

 * If we want to compare two values (e.g. the value the user entered and a fixed
   string) we use `==` instead of `=`
 * We can compare numbers and strings using the comparison operators `==`, `!=`,
   `<=`, `>=`, `<`, and `>`
 * If statements can be nested

We can also abbreviate the following:

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if number < 10:
  print(number + " is a small number.")
else:
  if number >= 10 and number < 100:
    print(number + " is not small, but not large either.")
  else:
    print(number + " is a large number.")
```

to

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if number < 10:
  print(number + " is a small number.")
elif number >= 10 and number < 100:
  print(number + " is not small, but not large either.")
else:
  print(number + " is a large number.")
```

You can have as many `elif` branches as you like, but only one `if` branch and
one `else` branch, which must appear at the beginning and end respectively.

Here we used the keyword `and` to mean that we want both `number >= 10` and `number < 100` to be true for that branch to be executed. You could use `or` and `not` in expressions, e.g.

```python
number = int(input("Please enter a number: "))
if not number < 10:
  # Will be executed if number is not less than 10 (i.e. if number >= 10)
  print("The number is not less than 10.")

if number == 3 or number == 4:
  # Will be executed if number is equal to 3 or equal to 4
  # Note that comparison is done with == rather than =
  print("The number is either 3 or 4.")
```
If you are using multiple different connectives, you should include parentheses to make it clear how the expression should be interpreted. E.g.

```python
number = input("Please enter a number: ")
if ((1 <= number and number < 10)) or number == 42) and (not number == 3):
  print("This was the number: " + number)
```

This code will only print `number` if it is one of the numbers [0, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 42].


## Good resources to look at

 * [Khanacademy][] - good for learning about computer science and computational
   thinking

 * [Codecademy][] - excellent introductory courses in different programming
   languages. Note that they currently use Python 2.x, whereas we are using
   Python 3.x

 * [Project Euler][euler] - programming challenges, probably a good place to
   practice after a couple of weeks

 * [Learn Python the Hard Way](https://learnpythonthehardway.org/python3/)

[khanacademy]: http://khanacademy.org
[codecademy]: http://codecademy.com
[euler]: http://projecteuler.net

## Excercise

* **Average of two numbers:** create a program, which takes as input two numbers and computes their average.

<!---2020 --->
